# Canon on Nudges
## Abstract  

Nudging is considered to be “any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people's behaviour in a predictable way without forbidding any options or significantly changing their economic incentives” (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). Whereas the traditional Rational Choice Theory of Economics would predict that nudges should have no effect on economic decision making because the monetary incentives remain unchanged, mounting evidence from laboratory experiments and field data has shown that nudges can and do affect outcome choices. There are many underlying mechanisms which might explain how nudges are able to alter behaviour. For example, the concept of socially desirable decision making can be traced back as far as Adam Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments (Smith, 1790), although many years passed before the field of Behavioural Economics would develop, inspired by findings in psychology. Today we can find nudges being used in many private initiatives and public policies, such as defaults for public organ donation or even decals of flies placed in urinals.
This canon seeks to explore how the concept of nudging developed, whether nudges are successful at predictably altering behaviours, and what underlying mechanisms might explain why nudges work.  

## Table of contents
1. Introduction
2. Concepts and definitions
  * Choice architecture
3. Historical examples of nudging
4. Nudges in modern experiments and public policies
5. Critiques and concerns
6. Mechanisms and limitations
7. Conclusions
8. References  

### 1. Introduction  

Can a rubbish bin asking smokers to vote for their favorite soccer team reduce the number of cigarette butts thrown on a street? Could a “heart healthy” label on a box of cereal change your consumption choice in the supermarket? Nudging is defined as, “any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people's behavior in a predictable way without forbidding any options or significantly changing their economic incentives” (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008). Whereas the traditional Rational Choice Theory of Economics would predict that nudges should have no effect on economic decision making because the incentives remain unchanged, mounting evidence from laboratory experiments and field data has shown that nudges can and do affect outcome choices. Today we can find nudges being widely used in many public policies and advertising campaigns such as defaults for public organ donation, “most popular” labels on corporate service plans, or even decals of flies placed in urinals. Do nudges really work, and how has the concept of nudging developed? This canon seeks to explore the different types of nudges, whether nudges are successful at predictably altering behaviors, and what underlying mechanisms might explain why nudges can work.  

This document is structured as follows: Section 2 defines the main concepts and types of nudges.  Section 3 examines why nudges work and which nudges should be used. Section 4 illustrates examples of nudges throughout history. Section 5 describes some modern examples of nudges in public and private policies. Section 6 provides some of the critiques that nudges have faced. Finally, section 7 states our main conclusions.  

### 2. Concepts and definitions  

Our starting point is the analysis of decision making. There are two different aspects in the analysis of a decision: First, there is the normative aspect, which focuses on how perfectly rational individuals would make their choices (i.e. they choose the optimal option for themselves). Second, there is the descriptive aspect, which focuses on how people, who are actually not perfectly rational, make decisions in everyday choices (Raiffa, 1982). On an everyday basis, individuals are subject to biases and intuitions that may guide the away from the choices a perfectly rational individual would take.  

A third aspect of decision analysis focuses on how individuals should make their everyday decisions, given that they are not completely rational. This is called the prescriptive aspect of decision making. For example, how could people be more aware of biases, especially when they lead them astray from what they would like to do, given their normative and rational preferences?   

From this point, we can start developing the concept of nudging. Nudges are some kind of reinforcements (which can be positive or negative), special ways of framing (Kahneman & Tversky, 1981) or suggestions that can influence the way people make decisions, without changing their monetary incentives and in a non-forced way. In public policies, authorities can manage the way choices are presented to individuals, that is, the choice architecture, in a way that they make better decisions, avoiding biases of everyday life.
In this context, “a nudge is any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people’s behaviour in a predictable way without forbidding any options or significantly changing their economic incentives” (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). In other words, a nudge specifies how individuals make important economic decisions by forming effective prescriptive techniques with the help of behavioural economics (Thaler & Benartzi, 2004).  

There are several ways of nudging individuals into a specific behaviour. Some of the most frequent types of nudges are explained below: 

1. 	**Default rules and Status Quo:**
A default is defined as what happens when someone does nothing, but instead follows the pre-set option (Thaler). A good example is the organ donation system in some countries of Europe, as will be developed in section 5.  

2. 	**Comparisons with the social norm:**
This nudge will encourage individuals think about their behaviour in comparison to the behavior of others. This kind of nudges in the private sphere include, for example, the messages displayed in hotels rooms; instead of saying “Please reuse your towels”, they make a sign that says “Join your fellow guests in helping to save the environment by reusing the towels”.  

3. 	**Increase in ease and convenience:**
This nudge is very common in cafeterias, where customers can be nudged to make healthier food choices by placing fruit closest to the checkout in place of candy. This kind of nudge aims to help individuals make better choices by suggesting them in a convenient and easy way.  

4. 	**Eliciting implementation intentions / self-control:**
Implementation intentions involve a concrete plan in a specific situation, leading to a better perception and attention to a critical situation. They are usually more successful than setting abstract goals since the goal-setter must contemplate a series of specific steps and actions. For example, a goal such as “I want to save more money” may be difficult to reach in practice as compared to an implementation intention, “Every time I get a raise, I will increase my savings rate.” This was exactly findings of the Save More Tomorrow (SMarT) Program, which was a savings program designed for individuals with self-control problems (Thaler & Benartzi, 2004).   

5. 	**Warnings:**
We can find this kind of nudge in grocery shops, where every food item is labelled with a green, yellow or red sticker. It displays such nudging aims to warn and remind people about how certain behaviours can deviate them from their initial goals.
While nudging is a relatively new concept in economic literature, the idea behind the concept has been used all through history, not only by policy makers but also by companies, managers in charge of teams, etc. 

## 3. Mechanisms and limitations  

As Thaler and Sunstein state, “people will need nudges for decisions that are difficult and rare, for which they do not get prompt feedback, and when they have trouble translating aspects of the situation into terms that they can easily understand” (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). But why might people need nudges? Unlike the perfectly rational homo economicus, people exhibit many sub-perfect behaviours. We have flaws in calculations, time inconsistencies, poor self-control, imperfect follow through, biases, and loss aversion. Things like social norms, priming, framing, and anchoring can change how our choice outcomes. Rules of thumb or heuristics are often used to make decisions because of lack of numeracy or difficulties in making calculations. For example, a person may have difficulties assessing how a choice of wine will relate to welfare: which one will taste the best? This person may use higher price as a heuristic to judge the quality or the wine although they may prefer the taste of a cheaper bottle.  The search cost to find their most preferred bottle may be too large such that they satisfice rather than maximize their utility. Another example of sub-optimal choice is dieting and exercising. Someone may determine the best course of action, but not be able to follow through with their resolutions because of high costs now, and delayed benefits which are only received much later (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008).  

Thaler and Sunstein also argue that nudges should meet three conditions before they can be used to change people’s behaviour. First, nudges should “help people save more, eat better, invest more wisely, and choose better insurance plans and credit cards—in each case only when they want to”. Therefore, we can say that nudges should help people to make better choices if that is what they would like to do. Second, nudges should have a low opt-out cost for anyone wishing to avoid the nudge; nudges should not force people into a particular choice or restrict their freedom to deviate from the prescribed choice. Third, because a nudge is often inevitable in the construction of a choice architecture, the government should select a nudge which optimizes welfare. Since there is often an implied nudge within any choice architecture, allowing inertia or random choice to select the nudge is less optimal than a government intervening to choose the nudge which would be most beneficial to consumers.   

Their arguments presume that the choice architect or government is in fact benevolent and interested only in improving the welfare of its citizens. They also assume that the choice architects will be better able to lead consumers to an optimal choice than the consumers are able to choose individually. Lastly, it presumes that the wants or preferences of consumers are known to the policy makers, but also that their preferences are comparable or relatively homogenous such that the same nudge would lead to an optimal choice for most consumers. Otherwise, it may be the case that while some consumers are helped by the nudge others are hurt by it (Schlag, 2010).

### Choice Architecture  

Nudges can have inadvertent effects other than what was intended by the policy makers. It is not always clear which type of nudge or wording will be most effective. It is important to understand the context of the decision-making process and identify which biases or heuristics may be affecting consumers. After this a suitable nudge can be selected dependent on whether policy makers are trying to encourage or discourage actions and whether they hope to influence automatic decision processes (System I responses) or rational decision processes (System II responses) (Ly, Mazar, Zhao, & Soman, 2013). Most often, the formulation of the nudge must then be tested via experiments for a given choice to see what would be most effective for policy applications.  

As economists learn more about the emerging field of nudging, more work must be done to see why nudges are successful under some conditions but unsuccessful or unable to be successfully replicated under other conditions (Newell, 2014). In time, we may find certain common characteristics between successful or failed nudge attempts which can be used as a guideline for when nudges may be practical to apply.  

## 4. Historical Examples of Nudging  

Nudging had long history of usage before Thaler and Sunstein defined the concept. We can find examples of nudging techniques being used in Europe as early as the 1700s (Halpern, 2015). It was a period in which the population was growing, but there was not enough food due to wars and revolutions. Therefore many countries in Europe stated to introduce the potato as a cheap way of reducing famine. However, this food was met with a lot of resistance from the people, since it had no smell or taste, and it was not mentioned in the Bible. As a way of stimulating people to eat potatoes, Frederick the Great (King of Prussia between 1740 and 1786) decided to use a nudging mechanism on the nation, planting potato fields in his own lands and ordering his soldiers to guard them, so that people would think that potatoes were a luxury good. Not surprisingly, once the fields had guards surveilling them, many people started stealing potatoes and planting them in their own yards, increasing its consumption and decreasing the famine.

Another famous example is from the early 1990s, when Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam, was looking for solutions about how to keep the men’s toilet clean. A nudging mechanism was put into practice, placing a picture of a fly inside of each urinal. Because people consciously do not like flies, men were more likely to aim at it. Due to this mechanism, the men’s toilet was way cleaner and the cleaning bill decreased in approximately 80% (Evans-Pritchard, 2013).
While these uses provide some historic evidence of the uses of nudging, it wasn’t until the 20th and 21st century that academics started developing literature and documenting field experiments and policies that used nudging mechanisms.

## 5. Nudges in modern experiments and public policies  

As illustrated, the concept of nudging offers many relatively easy and cost efficient possibilities to alter people’s behavior. This can be especially appealing to policy makers looking to minimize undesirable conduct or businesses looking to increase sales. Some examples of modern applications are discussed in the following paragraphs.  

Probably the most famous example of a nudging based study is Johnson and Goldstein, who demonstrated the difference between opting in- and opting out-systems of organ donations among countries. They report a significantly higher percentages of organ donors in the countries with an opt out system (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003). This is a clear example of how the status quo bias can work in a nudging context.

Figure 1: Comparisons between countries with an opt-in system and an opt-out system
![Figure 1: Comparisons between countries with an opt-in system and an opt-out system] (http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-FX4E9dMOZM8/VmT7X7ROW3I/AAAAAAAAA_0/ocasr8UL_p4/s1600/27%2BNormal%2BInvestors%2B-%2BStatus%2BQuo.png)

Source: [http://www.2muchcents.com/2015/12/normal-investors-status-quo.html] (http://www.2muchcents.com/2015/12/normal-investors-status-quo.html)

This kind of nudge, as described in the section 2, relies on the fact that people will generally keep the status quo option. This is also documented by Bernartzi and Thaler; Employees who are by default enrolled in at the Save More Tomorrow Program, automatically increase the percentage of their wage devoted to saving, from a 3.5% 40 months earlier to the program, to an average of 13.5% after the program (Thaler & Benartzi, 2004).  

Other often-observed drivers of nudges are social norms, which invite people to change their behavior when they believe they believe they are conducting themselves very different from what the “social norm” dictates. This was well documented in a public policy field experiment by Schultz et al.; providing the opportunity to a citizen to compare their energy usage with their neighbor’s usage leads the citizen to a more efficient use of energy (Schultz, Nola, Cialdini, Goldstein, & Griskevicious, 2007). Another example of this nudge is provided by the Behavioral Insights Team of the UK, who studied the people’s behavior when paying their phone bills: citizens who received social normative messages (“9 out of 10 people from your town pay their taxes on time”) have a 15% more probabilities of paying their bills on time, compared to people who don’t receive such message (Behavioral Insights Team, 2011). Curiously, while this type of nudge was quite successful, Torgler has found in Switzerland that other type of messages with a moral rather than social content (“paying your taxes is not the right thing to do”) don’t have an effect on the compliance rate (Torgler, 2004).  

As explained in section 2, nudges can also warn people about consequences of their actions in different forms, and in that way attempt to change their behavior. This kind of nudge was described in a field study conducted in Pennsylvania (Small, Lowenstein, & Slovic, 2007), which tried to raise the amount of people donating money to charity by showing them an identifiable victim (for example, the picture and the name of a poor girl). In their paper, the authors concluded that people donated almost twice the amount of money, compared to participants who were only confronted with a statistical report of victims.  

Another documented case of nudging being used in public policies is described by Wilson et al. In this paper (Wilson, Bogomolova, & Buckley, 2015) demonstrate how low-fat milk with the message “Pick me! I am low calorie” leads to an increase in the demand for low-fat milk, but only on short term. After three months, the effect of the sign completely disappeared.  

Other interesting but unsuccessful public policy, was conducted in France and assessed by Basso and Oullier, where the traditional disease-related messages on cigarette packages had been replaced by an image which shows a smoking adolescent on his knees, while facing a standing adult male. The purpose of this field experiment was to surprise smoking teenagers and to create a shock effect based on moral consequences rather than health consequences. However, teenagers started to smoke more as they craved for some cigarettes after seeing this suggestive image. They concluded that this method was unsuccessful, even though it stimulated political and ethical debates about smoking (Basso & Oullier, 2011).  

As we can see from these previous examples, nudging is not always a successful method to change behavior. This may be because people are habituated to their behavior, or because the effect may disappear on the longer run. In fact, if the mechanisms that are behind a person’s decision making process are not well understood and not well taken into account, nudging will not work as expected. This is why decision architects must always conduct careful research to understand how the nudges will work in practice.  

## 6. Critiques  

Nudges are however controversial. In this section we will outline four critiques of nudges: restriction of individual liberty, reduction in ability to learn from mistakes, presumption of an all-knowing government, and creation of a tool for manipulation.  

One of the most recognized critique of behavioral economics, and moreover to nudges, is the Harm Principle set forth by John Stuart Mill in his book On Liberty. The basic notion of harm principle is that of “letting people harm themselves as long as they do not harm anyone else” (Mill, 1869). In this sense, some authors emphasize that the idea of indirectly suggesting people what to decide –which is what a nudge is created for–, may be contrary to that of Stuart Mill and his principle of liberty. The main concern is that, when faced with a nudge, an agent may be losing her freedom to decide, even if the decision is to harm her own self. In the government side of the argument, Mill advocates that treating adults as if they were not rational beings deciding for themselves in their best self-interest may be having a paternalistic approach and thus not exercising power righteously.  

A second more recent critique, and related to that of John Stuart Mill, is that most people learn from their mistakes, so why is letting them make a few mistakes is a bad idea? Recent research that looks into late payment fees suggest that “consumers learn more about the existence and magnitude of fees when they knowingly or accidentally trigger them” (Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, & Laibson, 2013). The authors suggest that people learn from their mistakes and moreover –in this specific case– when faced with a fee for their mistake, these same consumers act in a more vigilant manner towards their credit card usage thereof. The evidence that Agarwal et al. give is that people not only learn from their mistakes, but that they are normally more concerned with their credit and the avoidance of a fee when committing a mistake beforehand. In other words, in order to learn, sometimes a mistake must be made. Therefore, if nudging people not to commit any mistake is limiting their freedom as well as prohibiting them to learn from their mistakes, then why is it that governments constantly insist on nudging people towards their best self-interest, assuming that they by themselves cannot do it?
Here, a traditional response of the nudging advocates is that there are several situations in which most people cannot learn from their mistakes, or situations in which their mistakes could be potentially costly, e.g. when buying a house, when choosing a life insurance, etc. Their conclusion is that, sometimes, some type of nudge for these situations could help people avoid costly mistakes.  

A third critique, and more related to the use of public policy, is the possibility of unintended consequences when using nudges. This critique is based on the idea that government is worse than we are (as individuals) at knowing what is good for us; proof of this is that there are a lot of policies that have backfired. One of the main reasons identified so far is that policy makers do not fully understand the effects that their policies may have in the end. For example, Robert Cialdini’s research nudged subjects for reducing crime rates by giving a message to people of “don’t steal,” and for reasons yet unknown, the message got interpreted as a “stealing is a common and socially acceptable behavior” and increased crime rates in the end (Cialdini et al., 2006). This example is added to the long list of nudges that did not work and that backfired in the end, perhaps due to the fact that people in charge of creating these nudges could not predict what was really going to happen. The existence of these cases has raised several questions in the usage of nudges.  

One fourth, but not final concern for using nudges, is that they can be coercive. Here, the line between nudging, coercion and manipulation has proved to be a very fine and crossable one. Although most of the coercive concerns for nudges have been identified in the private sector, most nudges, even the public ones, could be coercive and manipulative in several degrees.

## 7. Conclusions
Nudging is certainly not a new technique, and it has proved it can be very effective at shaping people’s behaviours. However, there’s a still much research to be done to understand the mechanisms behind nudges, and to discover what non-economic incentives are important in order to model human choices.

Although many moral and ethical concerns can arise from the use of nudges, such as whether or not the policy maker is better positions to prescribe a course of action, or whether or not they limit freedom of choice, we cannot overlook the fact that nudges are present in our lives. Even if a decision architect decides not to use an explicit nudge, there will still be an implicit nudge within the decision framework.  Whenever a message is delivered, or a product or program is offered, people will have to decide how to react based on the way the information they perceive is presented. 

It is our responsibility to acknowledge the inherent nature of nudges in choice architecture, and to study the mechanisms through which nudges work, such that choice architects can wilfully select those nudges which increase welfare.

## 8. References
*	Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J. C., Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2013). _Learning in the credit card market_. Retrieved from Harvard University: [http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/laibson/files/learning_credit_042413.pdf] (http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/laibson/files/learning_credit_042413.pdf)
*	Basso, F., & Oullier, O. (2011). _Smokers are suckers: Should incongruous metaphors be used in public health prevention?_ Amiran Journal of Public Health, 101(2), 203-204.
*	Behavioral Insights Team. (2011). [www.gov.uk] (www.gov.uk). Retrieved from Behaviorals Insight Team: [https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/60537/Behaviour-Change-Insight-Team-Annual-Update_acc.pdf] (https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/60537/Behaviour-Change-Insight-Team-Annual-Update_acc.pdf)
*	Cialdini, R. B., Demaine, L. J., Sagaring, B. J., Barret, D. W., Rhoads, K., & Winter, P. L. (2006). _Managing social norms for persuasive impact_. Social Influence, 1(1), 3-15.
*	Evans-Pritchard, B. (2013). _Works that Work_. Retrieved from _Aiming to reduce cleaning costs_: [https://worksthatwork.com/1/urinal-fly] (https://worksthatwork.com/1/urinal-fly)
*	Halpern, D. (2015). _Inside the nudge unit_. Virgin Digital.
*	Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). _Do defaults save lives?_ Science, 302 (5649), 1338-1339.
*	Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1981). _The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice_. Science, 221(4481), 453-458.
*	Ly, K., Mazar, N., Zhao, M., & Soman, D. (2013). _A practicioner's guide to nudging_. Rotman School of Management Working Paper.
*	Mill, J. S. (1869). _On Liberty_. London: Longman, Roberts & Green.
*	Newell, B. (2014). _'Nudging' people towards changing behavior: What works and why (not)?_ Retrieved October 2016, from The Conversation: Academic Rigour, Journalistic Flair: [http://theconversation.com/nudging-people-towards-changing-behaviour-what-works-and-why-not-27576] (http://theconversation.com/nudging-people-towards-changing-behaviour-what-works-and-why-not-27576)
*	Raiffa, H. (1982). _The art and science of negotiation_. Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University.
*	Schlag, P. (2010). _Nudge, choice architecture and libertarian paternalism_. Michigan Law Review, 108, 913-924.
*	Schultz, P. W., Nola, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicious, V. (2007). _The constructive, destructive and reconstructive power of social norms_. Psychological Science, 18(5), 429-434.
*	Small, D. A., Lowenstein, G., & Slovic, P. (2007). _Sympathy and callousness: The impact of deliberative thought on donations to identificable and statistical victims_. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 102(2), 143-153.
*	Smith, A. (1790). _The theory of moral sentiments_. Library of Economics and Liberty.
*	Thaler, R., & Benartzi, S. (2004). _Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral economics to increase employee saving_. Journal of Political Economy, 112.
*	Thaler, R., & Sunstein, C. (2008). _Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth and happiness_. Yale University Press.
*	Torgler, B. (2004). _Moral persuasion: An alternative tax policy strategy? Evidence from a controlled field experiment in Switzerland_. Economics of Governance, 5(3), 235-253.
*	Wilson, A. L., Bogomolova, S., & Buckley, J. D. (2015). _Lack of efficacy of a salience nudge for substituting selection of lower-calories for higuer-calories milks in the work place_. Nutrients, 7(6), 4336-4344.
